feat: experimental exact simulators (3/5) (#1855) (#1860)
rigetti/pyquil: docs/source/simulation_architecture.rst

  ``jax.jit``-compiled (amortizing compilation across a parameter sweep) and
  ``jax.grad``-differentiated (exact gradients of an output observable with
  respect to gate parameters), and trajectories can be vectorized with
  ``jax.vmap`` and sharded across devices.

The unit of noise is a **channel** keyed to a program instruction. A
:class:`~pyquil.noise._noise_model.NoiseModel` is, conceptually, a partial map
from instructions to channels,

.. math::

   \mathcal{N} : \text{instruction} \longmapsto \mathcal{E},

queried during simulation via ``NoiseModel.get_channel(inst)``. A channel's
``process`` is a superoperator that *includes* the ideal gate, so the channel
**replaces** the instruction rather than being appended after it:

.. math::

   \mathcal{E} \;=\; \Lambda \circ \mathcal{U},

where :math:`\mathcal{U}(\rho) = U \rho U^\dagger` is the ideal gate and
:math:`\Lambda` is the noise. An instruction with no channel is simulated
ideally.

Operator vocabulary
===================

The pipeline manipulates a small set of ``quax`` operator types. Each carries
explicit per-qudit dimensions (e.g. ``((2, 2), (2, 2))`` for a two-qubit

> operator, ``((3,), (3,))`` for a qutrit), so qubit and qudit systems are treated

Reviewer: These respectively represent a two-qubit and a single qutrit operator?

Author: Yes

uniformly.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 22 78

   * - Type
     - Meaning
   * - ``Unitary``
     - An ideal gate :math:`U`, acting as :math:`\rho \mapsto U \rho U^\dagger`.
   * - ``SuperOp``
     - A general linear map on density operators in column-stacking
       (Liouville) form, the canonical representation of a noisy ``Channel``.
   * - ``KrausMap``
     - A channel as a set of Kraus operators :math:`\{K_i\}` with
       :math:`\sum_i K_i^\dagger K_i = I`; the form a state-vector trajectory
       samples from.
   * - ``QuantumInstrument``
     - A measurement: a collection of outcome-labelled CP maps whose sum is
       trace-preserving. Models classification (confusion) error and
       post-measurement back-action.

Conversions (``to_superop``, ``to_kraus``, ``to_choi``, ``to_pauli_liouville``)
are provided by ``quax`` and are used by the adapters described below.

The simulation pipeline
=======================

> A simulator is an **object constructed from a program**, not a function called

Reviewer: This documentation is great, thanks.

I do wonder about a bit about the semantics here, however. This construction reminds me of QHB's Sampler + SamplerFactory. That's not a dealbreaker but something I'll bear in mind when reviewing the code. The one specific question I have is whether there is a set of configuration that is not scoped to a program that might be shared across simulations. Even if there isn't presently, is there a possibility that it will? `NoiseModel` itself is the most significant of these concerns and it's already abstracted nicely. What I'll be looking for is whether we need to differentiate b/t, for instance, `Simulator` and `SimulatorConfiguration` or `Simulator` and `ProgramSimulation`.

Author: I would anticipate not at this stage.

Reviewer: I didn't find any explicit concerns here; the simulators are minimally configurable. However, I would note that Cirq and Qiskit both instantiate simulators without a program:

* https://qiskit.github.io/qiskit-aer/tutorials/1_aersimulator.html
* https://quantumai.google/reference/python/cirq/DensityMatrixSimulator
* https://quantumai.google/qsim

Looking down the road, from what I recall, the plan was to support a sampler interface that does not take a program in the initializer. This doesn't preclude us from using a program-bound simulator in such a sampler, we would just have to pass all of the arguments down from the sampler initializer, which might not match a QPU backend. In contrast, if the sampler just takes a pre-configured simulator that meets implements some API, then we just pass that directly into the sampler initializer and then pass the program through during execution.

None of this is deal breaking, but I do wonder - what are your reasons for preferring a program-bound simulator interface?

trace/compile) be shared across every subsequent evaluation — a parameter sweep,
a gradient computation, or a batch of Monte-Carlo trajectories.

Construction runs four conceptual stages, each materialized as a closure:

.. code-block:: text

   Program (+ NoiseModel)
        │
        ▼
   ┌──────────────┐   MemoryMap ──► flat parameter vector θ
   │  Linearizer  │
        │
        ▼
   ┌──────────────┐   θ ──► [(operator, subsystem), ...]
   │   Resolver   │   (consults the noise model; ideal gates stay parametric)
        │
        ▼
   ┌──────────────┐   merge adjacent operators on the program DAG
   │  Compressor  │   up to `max_subsystem_size` qubits
        │
        ▼
   ┌──────────────┐   apply the operator stack to the initial state
   │  Calculator  │   (jit/grad/vmap-friendly)
        │
        ▼
   StateVector / DensityMatrix / (StateVector, outcomes)

The first three stages are shared infrastructure in ``_resolver.py``; the last
is specialized per simulator in ``_simulator.py``.

Linearizer
----------

A Quil program references classical memory by name and offset (e.g.
``theta[0]``). The linearizer flattens a :class:`~pyquil.api.MemoryMap` into the

> dense parameter vector :math:`\theta \in \mathbb{R}^{n}` that the rest of the

Reviewer: What is $n$ here?

Author: The number of parameters

Reviewer: Is it the maximum length across different memory region names? Or are all memory vectors concatenated into a single vector? These both have different memory scaling implications that I recommend stating explicitly... An example is probably most simple and effect here.

``Resolution`` bundling the inferred dimensions, the expanded operators, their
subsystems, the parameter layout, and the resolve closure.

Expansion does several things at once:

* **Noise resolution.** Each instruction is looked up in the noise model. A
  noisy gate becomes its ``SuperOp``; a noisy measurement becomes a
  ``QuantumInstrument``; a noisy reset becomes a ``SuperOp``. Instructions with
  no channel resolve to their ideal operator.

* **Most-specific typing.** Operators are kept in their tightest native type —
  ideal gates as ``Unitary``, channels as ``SuperOp``, measurements as
  ``QuantumInstrument``. This lets the cheapest backend (pure state vector)
  avoid density-matrix arithmetic whenever a program happens to be noiseless,
  and lets each backend choose how to adapt the rest (see *Adapters*).

* **Parametric closures.** A gate whose angle is a runtime memory reference is
  *not* resolved to a number. It is wrapped in a ``ParametricGate`` that, given
  :math:`\theta`, constructs the gate matrix. This keeps gate construction
  inside the traced/differentiated graph, which is what makes ``jax.grad`` with

>   respect to gate angles work.

Reviewer: Nice!

  stack is a compile-time constant and is materialized once and reused.

Because the whole calculator is a pure JAX function of :math:`\theta` (and, for
trajectories, a PRNG key), ``jax.jit`` and ``jax.grad`` compose with it directly.

The three simulators
====================

All three share the pipeline above and differ only in the state they evolve and
the operations they admit.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 26 30 14 14 16

   * - Simulator
     - Use case
     - Noise
     - Measurements / resets
     - Differentiable
   * - ``PureStateVectorSimulator``
     - Gate-only programs
     - No
     - No
     - ``jit`` + ``grad``
   * - ``DensityMatrixSimulator``
     - Any program, optional noise
     - Yes
     - Resets (measurements as total channel)
     - ``jit`` + ``grad``
   * - ``TrajectorySimulator``
     - Monte-Carlo sampling
     - Yes
     - Yes
     - ``jit`` (per batch)

The qubit ceilings are set by memory: a state vector holds :math:`2^{N}`
amplitudes, so pure-state and trajectory simulation are practical to roughly
:math:`N \lesssim 26`; a density matrix holds :math:`4^{N}` entries, limiting the

> density-matrix backend to roughly :math:`N \lesssim 13`.

Reviewer: Rather than specify arbitrary memory limits (which is highly system dependent), list the memory requirements (as a function) and possibly tabulate for different qubit sizes.

Also, if the entangled subsystems are smaller than $N$, are the memory requirements different for any of these methods? I think that's worth calling out explicitly.

Author: Untangled subsystems are not separated here, but the `Sampler` can do that.

Can provide memory budgets

   sim = PureStateVectorSimulator(p)

   def excited_pop(theta):
       psi = sim.compute(jnp.array([theta]))
       amps = psi.matrix.reshape(-1)
       return jnp.abs(amps[1]) ** 2          # P(|1>)

   grad_pop = jax.jit(jax.grad(excited_pop))
   print(grad_pop(0.3))                       # exact d P(|1>) / d theta

Density matrix
--------------

For noisy, deterministic evolution, propagate the density matrix
:math:`\rho \mapsto \mathcal{E}_D \circ \cdots \circ \mathcal{E}_1 (\rho)` exactly.
This is the backend to use for expectation values and process metrics under
noise, since it tracks the full mixed state without sampling. Measurements are
applied as their total (outcome-averaged) channel.

.. code-block:: python

   import jax.numpy as jnp
   from pyquil import Program
   from pyquil.gates import RX
   from pyquil.noise._channels import Channel
   from pyquil.noise._noise_model import NoiseModel
   from pyquil.simulation._simulator import DensityMatrixSimulator

   gate = RX(jnp.pi, 0)
   noise = NoiseModel.from_channels([
       Channel.from_gate_fidelity(inst=gate, fidelity=0.99),
   ])

   sim = DensityMatrixSimulator(Program(gate), noise_model=noise)

>    rho = sim.compute(jnp.array([]))           # final density matrix (a quax DensityMatrix)

Reviewer: Seems like the empty array should be default.

Author: Agree

Expansion does several things at once:

* **Noise resolution.** Each instruction is looked up in the noise model. A
  noisy gate becomes its ``SuperOp``; a noisy measurement becomes a
  ``QuantumInstrument``; a noisy reset becomes a ``SuperOp``. Instructions with
  no channel resolve to their ideal operator.

* **Most-specific typing.** Operators are kept in their tightest native type —
  ideal gates as ``Unitary``, channels as ``SuperOp``, measurements as
  ``QuantumInstrument``. This lets the cheapest backend (pure state vector)
  avoid density-matrix arithmetic whenever a program happens to be noiseless,
  and lets each backend choose how to adapt the rest (see *Adapters*).

* **Parametric closures.** A gate whose angle is a runtime memory reference is
  *not* resolved to a number. It is wrapped in a ``ParametricGate`` that, given
  :math:`\theta`, constructs the gate matrix. This keeps gate construction
  inside the traced/differentiated graph, which is what makes ``jax.grad`` with
  respect to gate angles work.

* **DEFCIRCUIT and cycle expansion.** ``DEFCIRCUIT`` bodies are expanded with
  formal-argument substitution. When a circuit invocation matches a

>   :class:`~pyquil.noise._channels.CycleChannel` in the noise model — a single

Reviewer: How are these matched? By name + qubit arguments + gate arguments?

  channel describing the joint noise of a whole parallel cycle — the cycle is
  replaced by the channel's constituent operators directly.

  A body must reference **only its own formal arguments**. Quil allows a literal qubit in a

>   body (``DEFCIRCUIT C q: X q; X 3``), but such a qubit is invisible to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  body (``DEFCIRCUIT my_circuit qubit: X qubit; X 3``), but such a qubit is invisible to
```

The current example is pretty hard to read - the circuit name looks like a gate.

>   ``Program.get_qubit_indices``, so it escapes the register the simulator sizes itself for.

Reviewer: I think this is a bug in `Program` rather than something we should accommodate. I suggest writing an issue and mention that this implementation should be fixed along with `Program.get_qubit_indices`.

  It is rejected rather than silently mis-simulated.

* **Gate modifiers are not supported.** ``DAGGER``, ``CONTROLLED`` and ``FORKED`` are all
  rejected. ``CONTROLLED`` and ``FORKED`` each add a qudit to the instruction, so the operator
  they denote is larger than the named gate and cannot come from a table lookup; ``DAGGER``
  could be honoured by conjugate-transposing, but is rejected too so that the supported gate
  set is one rule rather than a per-modifier exception list. Expand a modifier into an explicit
  gate — or, for ``DAGGER``, the inverse rotation angle — before simulating. Rejecting is the

>   important part: silently dropping a modifier would simulate ``RX(+theta)`` for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rejection ensures silent computational failures.
```

This last sentence sounds like Claude maxxing token output.
